    Molecular Mechanics Calculations using HARLEM and AMBER. 

            Tutorial: Energy Minimization and Molecular Dynamic Simulation of ALA-LYS-TYR peptide.

Files:

1)pept_1_init.pdb      - Initial geometry of ALA-LYS-TYR peptide (no hydrogens) in PDB format
2)calc_dih_1.py        - PYTHON script to compute a torsional angle in the points of MD trajectory
3)print_ene_1.py       - PYTHON script to print total energy in the points of MD trajectory
4)print_ene_2.py       - PYTHON script to print energies in the points of MD trajectory
5)calc_dist_1.py       - PYTHON script to compute distance between atoms TYR3.O and LYS2.NZ in MD snapshots 
6)comp_rms_1.py        - PYTHON script to compute RMS deviation of atoms of the first molecules along MD


Initial setup:

	1) Create a new directory with the name md_tutorial1.

	2) Copy files pept_1_init.pdb and *.py to this directory.



1. MM model setup and Energy Minimization of the peptide:

	Start HARLEM and load the initial geometry of the molecule provided in the file pept_1_init.pdb. 
       
      	File->Open Molecule - open file dialog box.
      	Choose "Protein Data Bank" (pdb) as the file type to load the file.


2. Fixing Molecular Structure according to Residue Templates:

	INFO: Molecular structures resolved by x-ray crystallography usually lack hydrogen atoms.
   	Often other groups of atoms are missing. To model a molecule we first need to fix the chemical 
 	structure to correspond to a correct molecular template.
   	HARLEM uses AMBER force-field and has a database of molecular structures for amino acid residues,
   	nucleotides, water, some organic molecules and simple ions. All molecular templates and 
   	force-field parameters are stored in the dyrectory
   	HARLEM\residues_db. 

   	The format of the template files is HARLEM file format: hlm. 
   	You can load any of the templates into HARLEM to visualize chemical groups known to HARLEM.


   	In this case we need to add missing hydrogen atoms and make sure the residue templates match.
   	To do so:

   	1)Open the Edit Residue Parameters Dialog ( Edit->Edit Residue Parameters)

   	2)Check if the first residue has a modifier NT (N-terminal) and that 
		the last residue has a modifier CT (C-terminal).
		This is needed to properly terminate the polypeptide chain. 
		There are special templates for end residues, hence there are 3 templates for each residue.
   
   	3)Check if the residue atom names and order conforms with the residue templates:
        	In the Edit Residue Parameters Dialog click on Edit->Check Res Struct
         	If there is a mismatch with a template the Console Window will display 
			diagnostic messages listing atoms that are missing compared to templates.   
   
   	4)Add hydrogens and other missing atoms of the residues:   
         	In Edit Residue Parameters Dialog click Edit->Add All Missing Atoms. 
         	Hydrogen atoms will be attached. 
         	Check Console Window for diagnostic messages.
 
   	5)Check again if the residues atom names now conform to the residue templates:
         	In Edit Residue Parameters Dialog click Edit->Check Res Struct
         	In the Console Window check for diagnostic messages. 
         	If the templates match, then no messages should appear.

   	6)Save the fixed molecule in the HLM format (*.hlm): 
         	Go to File->Save Molecule dialog
	 	Save the file as pept_1.hlm inside your directory.


3. Initial Structure Relaxation using Energy Minimization.

   	INFO: Energy minimization is needed to optimize the geometry of the newly added atoms 
   	and remove clashes between atoms that may exist in the structure.

   	1) Open the Molecular Mechanics Module Dialog:
         	Menu item: Basic Models -> Molecular Mechanics Calc 

   	2) Set Molecular Mechanics Model of the system:
        	Click on the "Edit MM Model" panel. 
		Click "Init MM Model" (Press this button only ONCE!)
        	You will see a list of the residue atoms appear in the window. Initiating the model allows
			you to modify the individual properties of a particular atom in the model before 
			running a simulation. In this part of the tutorial, do not modify any of the atoms.  
      
   	3) Switch to the "MM Run parameters" panel. 

   	4) Set the "Type of Caclulations" to Energy Minimization.

   	5) Set the Number of Minimization Steps to 2000.

   	6) Save the AMBER Input Files: 
         	Click "Save All AMBER Input Files" button. This creates input, topology, and coordinate
			files for the molecule you are working on.
	 	Remember to click "Save ALL AMBER Input Files" everytime you make a change in the 
			Molecular Mechanics Module dialog.
         	Optionally: In your working directory examine with an editor 
         	SANDER input files: (pept_1_init.inp, pept_1_init.top, pept_1_init.crd)

   	7) Run minimization (using external SANDER program of AMBER7):
          	Click "Run MM Calculations".
          	Examine the diagnostics in the console window. 
   
   	8) Load coordinates of the minimized energy structure from AMBER Restart file:

          	Click "Load Restart File"
          	Note the changed molecular geometry.
          	Optionally: In your working directory examine SANDER output files 
                     ( pept_1_init.out, pept_1_init.rst) 

   	9) Save the minimized energy structure in the HLM format as pept_1min.hlm.   


4. Energy minimization and Molecular Dynamics of the peptide in Water:

   	1) Close All Dialog Boxes and Molecular View Window 
     		(Or you can close and restart HARLEM)
  
   	2) Load peptide ALA-LYS-TYR peptide in the minimized energy geometry: 
		File->Open Molecule - open file dialog box.
		Open the pept_1min.hlm file you created earlier.

   	3) Solvate the peptide with water:
        Go to Edit->Solvate Molecules 
        In the Solvate Molecular Set" Dialog press "Solvate Molecule"
        Check the structure.

     	INFO: To solvate a solute molecule HARLEM places a cubic box of water molecules around 
     	the solute molecule. The box of water is prequilibrated for a simulation at room temperature. 
	The water molecules which overlap in space with the solute molecule are removed. 
	The procedure is simple and extra spaces will be created around the solute. 
	Energy minimization is used to allow water to equilibrate in the vicinity of the solute.

  	4) Run Energy minimization for the solvated peptide 
     		(Analogous to the unsolvated peptide - follow the same instructions above: Items 3.1 to 3.8)

  	5) Save the energy minimized solvated peptide in the HLM format to pept_1_box.hlm.

  	6) Close all Dialog Windows and Molecular View Window (or close and open HARLEM again).

  	7) Open the energy minimized solvated peptide from pept_1_box.hlm.

  	8) Open the Molecular Mechanics Module Dialog:
         	Go to Basic Models -> Molecular Mechanics Calc. 

  	9) Set Molecular Mechanics Model of the system
		Click on the "Edit MM Model" panel.
         	Click "Init MM Model" button

  	10) Set Constant Pressure Boundary conditions:
		Click on the "Force Field Parameters" panel.          
		In the Periodic Boundary Conditions select "PERIODICITY CONST PRESSURE".
          	Click "Set Module Parameters from Control Values" (Press only ONCE!)

  	11) Switch to the "MM Run parameters" panel

  	12) Set Type of Calculations to "MD simulations"

  	13) Set Frequency to output coordinates:
		On the bottom right of the dialog under "Output Freq"
		Set "coordinates" to 10. One snapshot every 10 MD steps will be saved to pept_1_box.mdcrd file.
		Note that the other ouput frequency values are also set to 10. Each ouput file will save snapshots
			every 10 MD steps. 
		If you change one of these values, you should make sure the rest are the same, otherwise you 
			will take snapshots at different MD steps.

  	14) Set "MD steps number" to 2000.
		Note that "MD time step" shows the length of time of one step, in this case 0.00100 picoseconds.
		"MD steps number" is the number of steps, hence we have set the simulation to run for 2 picoseconds.
		If you want to change the amount of time of the trajectory, change the number of MD steps.

  	15) Save Sander input files: 
           	Click "Save All AMBER Input Files".
  
  	16) Run MD simulations 
      		Click "Run MM Calculations".
      		Check for diagnostics and updated geometry in the Molecular View window.
 
  	17) After MD calculations have stopped - replay the trajectory by clicking "Playback Trajectory". 
      
  	18) Save the final geometry of the solvated peptide to pept_1_box.hlm file in the HLM format.


5. Analysis of MD trajectory using PYTHON scripts: 

   	1) Start HARLEM.

   	2) Load file pept_1_box.hlm. 

   	3) Open Molecular Mechanics Module Dialog:
         	Go to Basic Models->Molecular Mechanics Calc. 
  
   	4) Set Molecular Mechanics Model of the system:
         	Go to the "Edit MM Model" panel.
		Click "Init MM Model"
         	
   	5) Switch to "MM Run parameters" panel.

   	6) Set script to use:
		Click on "Choose Script" under "Script to run on MD points". 
		Choose calc_dih_1.py in your directory (Script to measure a particular torsional angle).
         	You should examine the calc_dih_1.py file with the sc1.exe editor in your HARLEM directory.
		Note that it saves data to a file called "tor1.dat."

   	7) Playback MD trajectory in pept_1_box.mdcrd file while using the script:
		Click "Playback Trajectory".

   	8) Check file tor1.dat using a text editor. 
		Copy the data to Excel and plot the computed evolution of the dihedral angle
      		TYR3.CE1-TYR3.CZ-TYR3.OH-TYR3.HH measured in tor1.dat.

   	9) Print time dependence of the total, potential, kinetic energies and temperature of the system:

          	9a) In the Molecular Mechanics Module dialog playback the MD trajectory while running 
			the print_ene_2.py script on the MD points of the trajectory.

          	9b) Open print_ene_2.py with a text editor to see the structure of the script.
              		Note 3 sections:
                  	if(script_status == STATUS_START):  - Script initialilization
                  	elif(script_status == STATUS_STOP): - Script final part executed after MD analysis
                  	else                              : - Part of the script executed at every point of MD trajectory
                     
          	9c) Using Excel, plot time dependence of total, potential and kinetic energies from ene_2.dat. 
   

Exercises: 

1) Starting from the minimized structure of pept_1_box.hlm:
	Change the charge of the LYS2 NZ atom to +5.0e in the Edit->Edit Atom Parameters menu.
	Run MD simulations with a periodical boundary condition at constant pressure for 5 ps.
      	Save MD snapshots and energies every 20 MD steps.
      	Replay MD trajectory restricting view only to the solvated molecule using the script reduce_traj_1.py,
		which can be found in the harlem\examples\MD folder.
      	Plot the distance between the atoms TYR3.O and LYS2.NZ along the MD trajectory using the script 
		calc_dist_1.py (data saved to dist1.dat file).
      	Explain the results observed. 
      	Compute and plot total, potential, and kinetic energies of the system using the print_ene_2.py script
		(data saved to ene_2.dat).
      	Compute the rms deviation of the atoms from the initial structure along MD trajectory using the 
		comp_rms_1.py script (data saved to rms_1.dat, check the original tutorial directory for the file 
		rms_1ref.dat to compare your results). 
              

2) Modify calc_dih_1.py to measure the torsional angle for rotation of the TYR ring.
      	Compute time evolution of this torsional angle along the MD trajectory using the data in tor1.dat.
 

3) Modify peptide ALA-LYS-TYR to ALA-GLU-TYR using Edit Residue Parameters dialog:
	Click Delete Extra Atoms and then click Add Missing Atoms.
      	Minimize the energy of the peptide without water.
      	Solvate the peptide in a box of water and minimize the energy.
      	Run MD simulations for 5 ps at constant pressure. 
      	Print and plot time evolution of the total energy in the system using the script print_ene_1.py.

